The great war of 1939-1945 was a blood letting without precedent in human history.  It has been 
estimated that fifty million people lost their lives in Europe alone.  Since then, with the advent of nuclear, 
chemical, and bacteriological weapons to augment the classical armories, our destructive potential has 
been multiplied by a factor in the thousands or even in the millions.  A small fraction of the arms now 
stockpiled would suffice to annihilate not only the entire human population of the globe, but (according 
to experts) all organic life on earth.  Thus the proliferation of military power and stocks of weapons 
throughout the world poses an ever-increasing danger not only to our species, but also to life in general.  
This predicament, unparalleled in the long history of biological evolution, must be met with immediate 
radical action.  
 
Nevertheless, the great majority of scientists do not hesitate to collaborate with the military 
establishment either directly or indirectly.  In doing so, they render themselves psychologically incapable 
of recognizing the magnitude of the peril, and lull themselves and others into a state of passivity that 
amounts to a complete renunciation of any responsibility to the human community.  This document, 
based on talks given at the Orsay Faculty of Sciences (June 26, 1970) and the University of Montreal (July 
8, 1970) is primarily a plea for a fundamental change in attitude and behaviour on the part of scientists – 
namely, for a policy of total non-cooperation with the military. 
 
I am thinking especially of younger scientists, who are not yet thoroughly shackled by long-standing 
habits of thought and action – or at least not as much as their elders.  Young people do however have the 
disadvantage (if you can call it that) of not having seen war and its consequences at first hand. Anyone 
who has seen a man killed like a dog before his eyes, or who has stood helplessly by while a guard whips 
an unarmed prisoner to death, is marked for life – he understands what war entails.  But for those who 
have never seen anything like that, citing a million deaths in Vietnam or Biafra evokes only polite 
astonishment or incredulous indignation.  Even the last world war is just a textbook matter to most 
people under thirty.  It is so far away, both in time and in space!  It is the stuff of Literature!  
 
So it is when one considers the prospect that humanity may disappear in the next few decades – three 
billion people! three billion years of evolution! – it is just too enormous to be grasped; it remains a 
faceless abstraction, utterly devoid of emotional content, and hence impossible to take seriously.  We 
struggle for raises in pay, for freedom of speech and of the press, for job security, against racism, against 
the Vietnam War or against war in general – but the annihilation of all life on earth transcends our 
imaginations; it seems unrealizable.  One is almost ashamed to speak of it for fear of seeming to seek 
"easy effects", when in fact it is one of the most "anti-effectual" themes of all.  
 
I have been reproached for not analyzing the "true causes" of the evils against which I propose to act – 
causes with labels such as "class structures", "profit motives", etc.  Such reproaches however have 
generally proven to be just one of a hundred other reasons for not acting, for continuing with the same 
old daily grind as before.  Must we argue true causes indefinitely?  Isn't that just one of the many ways of 
putting off our present responsibilities until the day when society will have changed?  If your house is on 
fire, the first thing to do is drench it with water – the analysis of true causes is for later.  And if you want 
to fight against an apparatus that you consider reprehensible and mortally dangerous, you begin by 
refusing to accept pay from that same apparatus and by warning those who have not yet recognized the 
danger. Anything else is just empty chatter. 
 
A more serious reproach, I am well aware, is the limited nature or the action that I am recommending 
against the military establishment.  It is merely a preliminary to more radical action.  But it is an essential 
first step, for until scientists divorce themselves from the military they simply cannot take a strong moral 
stand.  It is accordingly addressed to the individual level, and calls for an individual moral commitment 
from each one of us.  Thus its psychological importance far outweighs its practical importance.  To be 
really  effective, at the practical level, action must be coordinated and organized – even if only an a small 
scale at first.  Imagination and perseverance is required to gradually extend awareness of these 
considerations among colleagues, students, and the general public, so that effective action can be 
undertaken on a significant scale. 
 
I would like to thank all those who have helped me to  arrive at a better understanding of the problems 
discussed here, both in private conversation and in public discussion.  I am particularly indebted to my 
friend Gerard Daechael, who through his patient perseverance has made me realize the enormity of the 
perils that threaten us all.
